Master Key rotation (#1701)
OctopusDeploy/docs: docs/administration/managing-infrastructure/rotate-master-key.md

## What is affected by the rotation

Octopus [encrypts important and sensitive data](/docs/security/data-encryption.md) using a Master Key. This includes:

- The Octopus Server X.509 certificate which is used for [Octopus to Tentacle communication](/docs/security/octopus-tentacle-communication/index.md) - your Tentacles should still trust your Octopus Server after the rotation.
- Sensitive variable values, wherever you have defined them.
- Sensitive values in your deployment processes, like the password for a custom IIS App Pool user account.
- Sensitive values in your deployment targets, like the password for creating [Offline Drops](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/offline-package-drop.md).

## Rotating the Master Key

### Step 1. Back up before you start

Make sure to [back up everything](/docs/administration/data/backup-and-restore.md) before you start this process. This should also include the ``OctopusServer.config` which contains the old master key in case the process fails.

### Step 2. Stop the server

> Master key rotation currently only works when the server is stopped. The database will not be in a valid state during the rotation. You can do this with `Octopus.Server.exe service --stop`. This also ensures anything in memory or in transit is persisted to disk before we start.

Reviewer: Good callout, maybe just extend to point out in HA that _all_ nodes should be stopped

> Master key rotation currently only works when the server is stopped. The database will not be in a valid state during the rotation. You can do this with `Octopus.Server.exe service --stop`. This also ensures anything in memory or in transit is persisted to disk before we start.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Master key rotation currently only works when the server is stopped. The database will not be in a valid state during the rotation. You can do this with `Octopus.Server service --stop`. This also ensures anything in memory or in transit is persisted to disk before we start.
```

### Step 3. Rotate the master key

Once everything is backed up and the Octopus Server stopped, the steps are as follows.

> 1. Run `Octopus.Server.exec rotate-master-key` and follow the prompts. This will guide you through the steps and generate a report at the end of the process. A new master key will also be written to its own file. In an HA setup, this command can be run from any server node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run `Octopus.Server rotate-master-key` and follow the prompts. This will guide you through the steps and generate a report at the end of the process. A new master key will also be written to its own file. In an HA setup, this command can be run from any server node.
```

> 1. If you have an HA setup, run `Octopus.Server.exec set-master-key --masterKey=NEW_MASTER_KEY` on the other server nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If you have an HA setup, run `Octopus.Server set-master-key --masterKey=NEW_MASTER_KEY` on the other server nodes.
```

> 1. You can confirm the new master key is being used by running `Octopus.Server.exec show-master-key`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. You can confirm the new master key is being used by running `Octopus.Server show-master-key`.
```

> 1. Run `Octopus.Server.exe service --start` to start the Octopus Server running against the rotated database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run `Octopus.Server service --start` to start the Octopus Server running against the rotated database.
```

> **Please read the report carefully and get in touch with us if anything seems out of the ordinary. Back up your new Master Key!**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::warning
**Please read the report carefully and contact us if anything seems out of the ordinary. Remember to back up your new Master Key!**
:::
```

Reviewer 2: Is it worth providing a sample snippet of a report? I dont know how long it would be, but might be useful

### Step 4. Post-rotation

If the rotation goes well, everything should work exactly the same as before. You may want to check

- Tentacles are still healthy and can connect to Octopus Server.

> - The HA cluster is fully functioning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Each Server node is reporting as Online, and that Octopus is fully functioning.
```

### Step 5. Back up your Octopus Server certificate and Master Key

If not already, now is a great time to securely back up your Master Key and Octopus Server certificate!

> ### Test your backup

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Test your backup
```

---
title: Rotating the Master Key
description: A guide to rotating the Master Key on all machines hosting the Octopus Server.
position: 45
---

There are times you might want to rotate your master key, for example if you're worried about the existing master key being leaked. This guide walks you through this process. The rotation should have no impact once it's completed.

This guide assumes you still have access to your Master Key. You should be able to run the [`show-master-key` command](/docs/octopus-rest-api/octopus.server.exe-command-line/show-master-key.md). If you've lost access to the Master Key, please refer to [Recovering after losing your Octopus Server and Master Key](/docs/administration/managing-infrastructure/lost-master-key.md).

## What is affected by the rotation

Octopus [encrypts important and sensitive data](/docs/security/data-encryption.md) using a Master Key. This includes:

> - The Octopus Server X.509 certificate which is used for [Octopus to Tentacle communication](/docs/security/octopus-tentacle-communication/index.md) - your Tentacles should still trust your Octopus Server after the rotation.

Reviewer 3: @veochen-octopus  "Should" does not give me greater confidence. Have we tested all this and can assure users it **does** work?

Reviewer 3: Also what happens if the tentacles are restarted?

Reviewer 3: So I understand, the master key is used to create the certificate and once it is created, it is ok to change the master key.
This would only be a problem if we need to rotate the certificate, correct?

Author: >So I understand, the master key is used to create the certificate and once it is created, it is ok to change the master key.
This would only be a problem if we need to rotate the certificate, correct?

Correct.

> Also what happens if the tentacles are restarted?

Restarting tentacles should make no difference, since the cert and the thumbprint are the same after the rotation. As far as tentacles are concerned, nothing has happened to the server.

> "Should" does not give me greater confidence. Have we tested all this and can assure users it does work?

Yes this has been tested. I'm gonna leave "should" in there for now...as we can't guarantee 100%. But keen to hear what others think @zentron @harrisonmeister

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with the wording, but will defer to @zentron from a technical perspective on likely outcomes of it not working.

Reviewer: I'm happy to change it to `will` if it provides more confidence. Based on how it works it certainly _should_, so if it doesnt then theres a bug that needs reporting.

> - The Octopus Server X.509 certificate which is used for [Octopus to Tentacle communication](/docs/security/octopus-tentacle-communication/index.md) - your Tentacles should still trust your Octopus Server after the rotation.

Author: ```suggestion
- The Octopus Server X.509 certificate which is used for [Octopus to Tentacle communication](/docs/security/octopus-tentacle-communication/index.md) - your Tentacles will still trust your Octopus Server after the rotation.
```

- Sensitive variable values, wherever you have defined them.
- Sensitive values in your deployment processes, like the password for a custom IIS App Pool user account.
- Sensitive values in your deployment targets, like the password for creating [Offline Drops](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/offline-package-drop.md).

## Rotating the Master Key

### Step 1. Back up before you start

Make sure to [back up everything](/docs/administration/data/backup-and-restore.md) before you start this process. This should also include the `OctopusServer.config` which contains the old master key in case the process fails.

### Step 2. Stop the server

> Master key rotation currently only works when the server is stopped. In an HA cluster this means all the server nodes need to be stopped. The database will not be in a valid state during the rotation. You can do this with `Octopus.Server service --stop` on each server node. This also ensures anything in memory or in transit is persisted to disk before we start.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Master key rotation currently only works when Octopus server is stopped, as the database will not be in a valid state during the rotation process. In an HA cluster, this means all the server nodes need to be stopped. You can do this with `Octopus.Server service --stop` on each server node. This also ensures anything in memory or in transit is persisted to disk before we start.
```

Once everything is backed up and the Octopus Server stopped, the steps are as follows.

1. Run `Octopus.Server rotate-master-key` and follow the prompts. This will guide you through the steps and generate a report at the end of the process. A new master key will also be written to its own file. In an HA setup, this command can be run from any server node.
1. If you have an HA setup, run `Octopus.Server set-master-key --masterKey=NEW_MASTER_KEY` on the other server nodes.
1. You can confirm the new master key is being used by running `Octopus.Server show-master-key`.
1. Run `Octopus.Server service --start` to start the Octopus Server running against the rotated database.

:::warning
**Please read the report carefully and get in touch with us if anything seems out of the ordinary. Back up your new Master Key!**
:::

Here's the beginning of an example report:

```text
================================================================================
ROTATE MASTER KEY REPORT
================================================================================
New Master Key: Gj3GfVf1gLn8kQA7wX4iXw==
Processed 10533 documents.
10009/10533 documents were updated

> 0/10533 documents were left unchanged due to errors

Reviewer 3: @zentron @veochen-octopus we are looking at using this in cloud instances, and I am unsure what this line in the report means? Does this mean some documents won't decrypt, do we need to rollback?

Author: I admit this line reads a bit weird. It's like this for now to be consistent with the `lost-master-key` report. It just means there are 0 errors. In reality, if we do get an error, it _should_ automatically rollback the entire transaction. This has been tested. So we should never see this number go above 0. If that happens then we have a problem.

This guide assumes you still have access to your Master Key. You should be able to run the [`show-master-key` command](/docs/octopus-rest-api/octopus.server.exe-command-line/show-master-key.md). If you've lost access to the Master Key, please refer to [Recovering after losing your Octopus Server and Master Key](/docs/administration/managing-infrastructure/lost-master-key.md).

## What is affected by the rotation

Octopus [encrypts important and sensitive data](/docs/security/data-encryption.md) using a Master Key. This includes:

- The Octopus Server X.509 certificate which is used for [Octopus to Tentacle communication](/docs/security/octopus-tentacle-communication/index.md) - your Tentacles should still trust your Octopus Server after the rotation.
- Sensitive variable values, wherever you have defined them.
- Sensitive values in your deployment processes, like the password for a custom IIS App Pool user account.
- Sensitive values in your deployment targets, like the password for creating [Offline Drops](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/offline-package-drop.md).

## Rotating the Master Key

### Step 1. Back up before you start

> Make sure to [back up everything](/docs/administration/data/backup-and-restore.md) before you start this process. This should also include the ``OctopusServer.config` which contains the old master key in case the process fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Make sure to [back up everything](/docs/administration/data/backup-and-restore.md) before you start this process. This should also include the `OctopusServer.config` which contains the old master key in case the process fails.
```

1. Run `Octopus.Server service --start` to start the Octopus Server running against the rotated database.

:::warning
**Please read the report carefully and get in touch with us if anything seems out of the ordinary. Back up your new Master Key!**
:::

Here's the beginning of an example report:

```text
================================================================================
ROTATE MASTER KEY REPORT
================================================================================
New Master Key: Gj3GfVf1gLn8kQA7wX4iXw==
Processed 10533 documents.
10009/10533 documents were updated
0/10533 documents were left unchanged due to errors

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Replaced Master Key
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Your Master Key has been replaced, and all of your sensitive values updated with new Master Key.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
10009/10533 documents were updated
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
